[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
We've got a great guest
for you, Brooks Agnew
back with us, an
Air Force veteran.
He received his Bachelor
of Science degree
with honors in chemistry from
Tennessee Technical University.
He is a seven time best selling
author with 11 titles in print.
He's been the host
of "X-Squared Radio"
for 15 years and is currently
the CEO of an electric truck
company in North Carolina.
Brooks, welcome back
to "Beyond Belief."
>>BROOKS AGNEW: Thank
you so much, George.
Good to be here.
>>NOORY: How have you been?
>>AGNEW: Wow.
I mean, the pace at
which everything is going
is just amazing.
The world is changing
so fast and having
to adapt to all those changes
really keeps you on your feet.
>>NOORY: It doesn't stop.
>>AGNEW: It doesn't stop.
You know, things we
thought we could rely on
in a decade or even
five years or two years,
all those are out the window.
Everything changes
because of global forces
that are having local effects.
>>NOORY: Over the
years, you and I
have talked about
a possible trip
to the center of the Earth.
Remember that one?
>>AGNEW: Yes.
>>NOORY: That was a great story.
We've talked about space
issues and everything else.
You're multifaceted.
Where did you get all
this historical data from?
>>AGNEW: Well, I do
a lot of research.
>>NOORY: You do.
>>AGNEW: First of all,
for writing the books,
you have to do a lot of
research to get the background
information to fill that in.
And in doing that, you
just pick up pieces--
treasures-- along the way.
And then when it comes
time to recall them,
I'm fortunately able to
recall them when I need to.
Then I can tell a good story
and put those things together,
connect the dots, so
to speak, so people
can understand what's going on.
>>NOORY: 51 years ago, we went
to the moon with Apollo 11.
Why did we stop?
>>AGNEW: I think there
were a lot of reasons.
In '72, we actually had two
full launch crews ready to go.
We had the launch engines.
We had the crews and the
backup crews all trained.
They were all paid for.
And suddenly we just
stopped going to the moon.
As it turns out, I think
the main force that
made that happen was political.
As you know, every two
years, Congress changes.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>AGNEW: Congress holds
onto the purse strings.
They're the ones that spend
the money, allocate the money,
decide where the country's
going to go monetarily.
And they just decided that
the public was tired of space.
So they just ended the program.
>>NOORY: It was like
the competitiveness
with the Soviets at
the time pushed us.
I always remember
that JFK speech.
We choose to go to the moon.
Once we did it-- you're right--
I think people
got bored with it.
>>AGNEW: Yeah.
We don't go there
because it's easy.
We go there because it's hard.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>AGNEW: And you're
exactly right.
But, again, we're talking
about these global forces.
We were competing with the
Russians-- or the Soviets then.
And it was an economic
game, but it was also--
something I mentioned
before is the high ground.
We know that whoever
controls the high ground is
going to control this world.
And for all intents
and purposes,
the moon is the high
ground right now.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>AGNEW: Well, because it's--
sits above the Earth and
you're able to defend it.
But you're able to
pick off satellites
that are in low Earth orbit
from the moon quite easily.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>AGNEW: And you're
so far away that you
can't be hit with a missile or
a laser or anything like that.
So you really are in a great
offensive and defensive
position.
>>NOORY: What about helium-3?
I keep hearing so much about it.
What is it?
And why is it so sought after?
>>AGNEW: Helium is
the result of fusion.
When you put two hydrogen
protons together,
you make helium.
On this planet,
we have helium-4.
It's what we fill our
party balloons with.
We do have some hel--
>>NOORY: It makes us talk like
this if you suck it in, right?
>>AGNEW: Exactly.
But helium-3 only
exists around volcanoes.
It comes up from inside
the Earth and with magma,
and so it's rare on this planet.
On the moon, it's been exposed
to solar radiation for billions
of years.
And so helium-3 has
accumulated in large amounts,
and in low craters,
it is actually frozen,
sitting there--
>>NOORY: Frozen?
>>AGNEW: Frozen, like--
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
>>AGNEW: --mountains
the size of Everest,
upside down, in craters on
the south pole of the moon,
just sitting there.
The beauty of helium-3 is
it is isotopic, in a sense.
It has one less proton.
So when you take helium-3
and you mash them together,
you end up with
helium-4 plus 2 protons.
But you also release
a lot of energy.
So the beauty to that
is, instead of fission,
like we use now in our nuclear
power plants where we put off
neutrons, neutrons
cannot be controlled.
They have no charge on them.
We can't move them around
with electrical charge.
But protons, we can.
So a helium-3 reaction
isn't radioactive.
So you could make energy,
lots of it, without radiation.
>>NOORY: The program
"Science Verse" tells us
where most of the supply
of helium-3 is held.
Let's take a look, Brooks.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- When it comes to supply,
helium-3 can be found on Earth,
however, not in amounts we
would consider adequate.
You see, our tremendous
amount of helium-3
is not found down in the ground
but rather up in the sky.
Yup, our moon is a
cornucopia of helium-3.
But how is this?
The simple answer is solar
winds containing helium-3.
For those of you who don't
know what solar winds are,
I covered them in my Mars video.
Anyways, solar winds containing
concentrations of helium-3
have bathed the moon
in the substance.
However, the helium-3 wasn't
scattered across the moon
evenly with some regions
containing more than others,
especially with lunar
maria containing
more than half the
helium-3 on the moon.
Moreover, meteorite
collisions have
resulted in the helium-3 being
buried a couple of meters
deep in the lunar soil, leaving
us with the question of,
how do we extract it?
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Exactly what
you've been saying.
>>AGNEW: Well, great
minds think alike.
But as it turns out, it's not
scattered all over the moon.
It's mostly concentrated in what
we call Schrodinger's basin,
which is on the south pole.
>>NOORY: Just there.
>>AGNEW: It is not
really ever in the dark,
and it's not ever
really in the light.
But it does receive the solar
wind going around the moon.
It's so cold there that helium-3
can exist in solid form.
So it's easy to mine.
In the Schrodinger's basin
are many large craters.
One of them is called
the Shackleford crater.
Now, if we could
land on that crater,
we could actually drill and
core and mine helium-3 solid.
>>NOORY: And how do
you get it back here?
Do you have to fly it back?
>>AGNEW: We do.
We have a system of canisters.
We put them in canisters,
and the canisters
launch into orbit.
They're collected in a carrier
craft, which takes them up
into orbit.
And then it can
then be picked up
or fly itself back to
low Earth orbit, where
it can be extracted.
>>NOORY: How big are
these canisters, Brooks?
>>AGNEW: The canisters
hold about 3 kilotons.
>>NOORY: That's pretty big.
>>AGNEW: They're a
pretty good size.
The next generation
of this, of course,
is to not bring all the
helium-3 back to Earth.
It would certainly be valuable.
But its real value comes as a
fuel for interplanetary travel.
>>NOORY: From there--
like a base, right?
>>AGNEW: Right, right.
We could actually
refuel our crafts
in space, which would be
greatly valuable because it's
so expensive to lift fuel
from the Earth into orbit.
It's like $20,000 per kilogram.
It's amazingly expensive.
>>NOORY: It's huge.
It's huge.
So it would be worth it
financially to extract this?
>>AGNEW: It's a gold rush.
If we could put and
build craft in space,
lift all the pieces, like it
would be the International
Space Station.
We have a system we
call the gateway.
The gateway is a
system of craft made
by different private
companies, like Bigelow
inflatable in habitats, and
launch engines, and fusion
rocketry.
And all these things
are put together
like a Tinkertoy in space.
You're talking something
half a million tons in size.
We could never lift
it off the Earth.
But then you refuel
it in space, and then
it can take off for Mars or
wherever you want to take it.
>>NOORY: Why did the
Soviets, now the Russians,
just basically
forget about space?
>>AGNEW: Well, they're-- the
Soviets had tremendous economic
power, and they could draw from
the technology from areas like
Kazakhstan and Livonia and--
but now the states
have all broken up,
and they're all private.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>AGNEW: So Russia
is rather small.
It's not really a big
economic power in the world.
It has become autonomous
in a lot of ways,
but it has a lot
of good technology.
So it has to integrate
itself into other programs.
The Russians and the
Americans work very, very well
together in space.
It doesn't appear to work very
well together in politics,
and I still can't
understand that.
But that's where we're at.
>>NOORY: How about
the Chinese, Brooks?
Where are they headed?
>>AGNEW: The Chinese
is a different story.
With China-- and I've done
business with China, now,
for over 20 years.
I'm doing business
with China right now.
But it isn't like doing
business with Chinese companies.
It's like doing business
with the Chinese government.
And the Chinese government has
a different idea about space
than the Chinese people.
Chinese scientists that I
work with, they're brilliant.
They're smart.
I graduated with a bunch
of them from college.
They're diligent.
They work hard.
But they do not have the
same goal as their party.
The party has a different goal,
and that's that higher ground.
They want control.
>>NOORY: And they want
this party control.
They seem to be headed that way,
in that direction, together.
>>AGNEW: We're not
coordinating with the Chinese
on this effort.
So all of the probes
that we've seen
go to the moon and the Chinese
Space Station and other things
have been purely
Chinese efforts.
The upsetting thing
about it is about 90%
of the technology that is
in those craft is ours.
>>NOORY: That's right.
What'd they do, steal it?
>>AGNEW: Yes.
>>NOORY: Everything they do,
they've stolen, basically.
>>AGNEW: Or it was sold to them
for money, for political power.
>>NOORY: Right, exactly.
I understand the Clinton
administration sold a lot,
didn't it?
>>AGNEW: Well, it's like I'm
going to leave this laptop here
on this counter, and if it's
not here when I come back,
I don't know where it went.
>>NOORY: Uh huh, I'll be right
back, that kind of thing?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, and
by the way, here's
my nonprofit where you
can deposit the money.
>>NOORY: And it was done?
>>AGNEW: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Oh god, frustrating.
I know they're going to
Mars now, too, right?
>>AGNEW: Yes, the Mars
is really the big goal.
And the reason is because
it has some atmosphere.
It has way more
gravity than the moon.
It doesn't have the fuel
reserves that the moon does.
But it has access to an
even bigger treasure.
>>NOORY: And that is?
>>AGNEW: The asteroid belt.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>AGNEW: The asteroid
belt is right outside--
>>NOORY: That asteroid
belt consists of what?
>>AGNEW: Wow.
You name it-- solid, platinum,
asteroids, gold, copper--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>AGNEW: Oh, yes-- iron.
But the real gold
in space is water.
And there are entire mountains
of water floating frozen
in space.
>>NOORY: What do we
want water there for?
We've got enough here.
>>AGNEW: Yeah, but we can lift
water from the Earth to Mars.
But that would be
incredibly expensive.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>AGNEW: If you could
grab a water asteroid
and pull it to Mars,
which would be easy to do,
then you've got all
that water right there
at a fraction of the cost.
And water could be used not
only to drink, but also to make
oxygen and also to
make rocket fuel.
>>NOORY: Huh.
You've got this down
to a science, Brooks.
>>AGNEW: It is a science.
And I don't think one
person has a grasp on it.
I've been speaking in my
research for my latest
book, "Asteroid Mining," with
a lot of private companies.
And they've all specialized
in tiny, little places--
surface robots that do
nothing but dig and process
minerals, the launch systems
that fill up the canisters
and launch the
canisters up into orbit
where they could be picked up.
There's whole
companies that do that.
And of course,
what has happened,
as in all entrepreneurial
ramp-ups like this,
you have a lot of acquisitions.
You have a lot of
companies getting so far
and going bankrupt, which
just happened with--
I think it's OneWeb.
They launched several
hundred satellites
for their internet system.
And then SoftBank--
>>NOORY: And they go belly up.
>>AGNEW: Yeah, SoftBank didn't
make the next capital call,
and they went belly up.
But all those satellites
are still up there.
So they're acquired by
another company and--
>>NOORY: Will we ever
get back to the moon?
Will we ever colonize the moon?
>>AGNEW: Yes, I think so.
Right now, we're working on--
around our planet,
we have a GPS system.
It's aging.
We're beginning to replace
that with smaller--
what we call CubeSats, which
are more efficient, more cheaper
satellites to build.
>>NOORY: They work the same way?
>>AGNEW: They work the same
way, but much higher frequency.
We're dealing with much
higher frequencies now.
We're into 5G and 6G.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>AGNEW: And these systems
will be very efficient.
We extrapolate that GPS system
and kind of envelope the moon.
But it doesn't give
us much resolution.
We can't use them for landing.
The Indians just tried that,
and they splatted their rover
on the planet at
several hundred knots.
They just didn't
have the resolution.
So we need to put a GPS
system around the moon.
And that's being
designed right now.
>>NOORY: What is the advantage
of us living on the moon?
>>AGNEW: Well, the
advantage is you
have a lot more
access to minerals
that you don't
have on the Earth.
And you don't upset the
ecology of the Earth.
It takes-- it really hurts
the land to strip mine it
or to dig into it or to
blow it up or bulldoze it.
And we're very conscious of
the ecobalance of our planet.
So we can use other worlds
that don't have that concern.
We can mine helium-3 on the
moon for hundreds of years.
And there's enough helium-3 on
the moon to power everything
we have on the Earth
for another 1,000 years.
>>NOORY: The moon's only 239,000
miles away from good old planet
Earth.
It's much closer than Mars or
any other celestial object.
Is that an advantage for us?
>>AGNEW: Sure.
It's just two days away.
There are a couple challenges.
One is what we call
the cislunar space.
This is the space between
Earth and the moon.
In between, there
is a magnetosphere,
but there's also a Van
Allen radiation belt.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>AGNEW: Easy to send
probes and robots
and payloads and things are,
hard to send people through.
>>NOORY: That's the skeptics who
say we never went to the moon
cite that Van Allen belt as
one of the reasons we never
got there.
>>AGNEW: Well, that's why--
they're looking at it now.
But when we were running
the space program from '69
to '72 really aggressively
with humans, as it turned out,
the Van Allen radiation
belt was very relaxed.
And we were going
through it so fast
that the astronauts were only
exposed for about two minutes.
So they were able to use
the thin lead shielding
that they had to
protect the astronauts,
and that's why we
went through it.
People say, well, we
didn't have the computers.
How did they land the
craft on the moon?
And that answer is very easy--
because we flew it.
We piloted--
>>NOORY: Manually.
>>AGNEW: --to the ground.
Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
I know, Armstrong, that's
how he landed on the moon.
>>AGNEW: And they practiced
and practiced and practiced.
You know, I look at
baseball players.
You take a person that
can see a ball that's
76 millimeters in diameter--
>>NOORY: At 90 miles
an hour, is it not?
>>AGNEW: Oh, it's hit
at 110 miles an hour.
And an outfielder
will see that hit,
and he will operate millions of
muscles and eyes and everything
and make adjustments,
and he will
intercept that ball
in flight, jumping
and catch it in a glove.
Only one out of 10,000
humans can even do that.
It's even smaller number
that can land a lunar
lander on the moon.
And that was the
best of the best.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
I got a chance to talk with
astrophysicist Jeffrey Bennett,
who talked about colonization.
Do you think civilizations,
Jeffrey, get to a point
where they will eventually
die out, even the humans?
Eventually, we're going to
reach a peak, a saturation
point, and then tail off.
>>JEFFREY BENNETT: It's a
really interesting question.
My own belief is
that you either--
and this is very
important because it's
where we are today.
You reach a point, like we
are now, where we actually
have so much power
in our technology
that we can do a lot of
really horrible things.
>>NOORY: Yes, we can.
>>BENNETT: And we could
easily wipe ourselves out
of existence over
this next century.
If we don't, if we find a
way to solve our problems,
that's going to require
creating political structures,
social structures that
prevent people from using
this technology in bad ways.
And if we do that,
then the doors
are wide open for us
to set out to colonize
the planets and maybe
thousands of years from now
to being in
colonizing the stars.
And once you do
that, it would seem
like you're almost immune
to being wiped out,
because as you spread yourselves
around to many worlds,
even if one world suffered a
catastrophe, you will survive--
your species will
survive on other worlds.
And you already have
these structures,
political and
social, in place that
are allowing you to survive.
So I think civilizations get to
this point where we are today,
and this is where
it all happens.
>>NOORY: It's the turning point.
>>BENNETT: This is
the turning point.
It's over the next
50 to 100 years
for us that we make
all the decisions that
will decide whether we
end up wiping ourselves
out and falling off
or whether we're
on our way to becoming
a galactic civilization
or joining a galactic
civilization that may already
predate us.
>>NOORY: The Federation.
>>BENNETT: Correct.
>>NOORY: The late
physicist Stephen Hawking
felt that we needed to leave
this planet for reasons
like that.
What do you think?
>>AGNEW: Well, as I do my
anthropological research,
as he did, I came up with a
little different take on it.
I see that each time in
history, when we have a frontier
to explore, whether it's
America or whether it's
another continent,
there's generally peace.
And the reason is because
the same people that
are ruling the world today have
ruled the world for thousands
and thousands of years.
Maybe in 1776, they lost
a little bit of that rule
when America was formed.
Nobody saw it coming, really.
No prophet, seer, revelator
ever saw America coming.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>AGNEW: So now
we're to the point
where we're almost ready
to hand America back over
to that global power.
And we could see it--
>>NOORY: It seems like we are.
>>AGNEW: Well--
>>NOORY: Doesn't it?
>>AGNEW: We're at a point
of conflict right now.
At last, finally,
I think Americans
see that global power.
We didn't really even
think it existed before.
Now we do.
We know who it is.
We know what it is.
But there's no frontier.
There's no place for
Americans to run.
This is it.
All the land in
the whole world is
developed unless you want
to move to Antarctica,
which I don't think we do.
The next frontier is space.
>>NOORY: Is space.
>>AGNEW: If we can--
>>NOORY: Always was.
>>AGNEW: --open up the frontier,
I see 1,000 years of peace.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>AGNEW: Yeah.
>>NOORY: You still
see the globalism?
>>AGNEW: Well, globalism
has always been tried.
And I think it maybe even
have supernatural roots to it.
But humans are not globalists.
Humans are localists.
We're social
animals, and we like
to meet and work with one
another in communities.
There are entities that
like to control all that.
And by control, I don't mean
they want to feed us every day
and educate us and take care
of us from cradle to grave.
That's not it at all.
They want to control our souls.
And that's why we always
flee to the wilderness.
If you look through history,
when we fled to the wilderness,
it was worth everything.
People sold everything,
including their own freedom,
to get here so
they could be free.
>>NOORY: Why are these people
who are so obsessed with
controlling us--
what's their motivation?
What do they want?
>>AGNEW: Well, I don't
think it's people--
>>NOORY: Besides
the soul, of course.
>>AGNEW: I don't think it's
people that want the control.
People just want to be wealthy,
and they want to be powerful.
>>NOORY: And have--
>>AGNEW: They want to
have a life of ease and--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>AGNEW: --and importance--
celebrity style, I guess.
I think there's a supernatural
level to this, almost--
I don't want to say Lucifer
or something like that.
I don't want to get
crazy like that.
But there's--
>>NOORY: Oh, go ahead.
>>AGNEW: Well, there is
some ancient intelligence
behind this, because, as I
look at it going from 3,000 BC
until now, the
methods, the strategy,
the tactics are always the same.
And humans aren't like that.
We evolve.
We change.
We attack things from
different methods.
This is the same method over
and over and over again,
just different people--
different people.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
Let's talk about colonization.
How realistic do
you think it is?
>>AGNEW: I think
it's very realistic.
And now, the difference in
technology for the moon, that's
where we have two communities.
We have one community
that says, hey,
let's build big,
beautiful, domed cities
on the surface of the moon--
not very practical.
The sun has terrible
fits which would wipe out
a surface civilization.
The key to colonizing the
moon are the volcanic vents,
the underground network
of tunnels and vents
that are on the moon.
>>NOORY: For energy?
>>AGNEW: Well, you'd be
protected from solar radiation.
All we'd have to do is
seal up the openings,
slightly pressurize
that, and feed it energy,
and you would have
an environment
on the inside of the moon.
>>NOORY: That's
dramatic, isn't it?
>>AGNEW: It doesn't take
that much work, really.
We have-- we're practicing with
volcanic vents on the Earth.
We have 3D printers that can
easily be sent to the moon
to seal up the openings.
It would take about
a dozen years or so
to put an atmosphere
equivalent to, say, 8,000 feet
altitude here on Earth inside.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>AGNEW: So you wouldn't
need a suit or anything
to live in there.
>>NOORY: God, what a boring
life, though, wouldn't it be?
>>AGNEW: Not really.
>>NOORY: Would you
want to go there?
>>AGNEW: There'd be a lot to do.
Plus, you'd only weigh one
sixth what you weigh here.
>>NOORY: I'll diet.
I'm not sure I'd want to
go to the moon and stay.
>>AGNEW: I would go.
I would go in a second.
>>NOORY: And stay?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, sure.
>>NOORY: Like, for
the rest of your life?
>>AGNEW: Well, yeah, I think so.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>AGNEW: Just because
it's a different place.
It's a different environment.
There are things to do.
And everything you do
changes the world forever.
>>NOORY: You have given us
some pictures of asteroids.
Let's take a look
at some of them.
>>AGNEW: Sure.
>>NOORY: And tell us what
we're looking at here
and how this ties into
some of our things.
What's this, Brooks?
>>AGNEW: Well, this is a
hybrid space station where
they take an asteroid
and all the elements that
are on the asteroid,
and then they
build equipment on the
asteroid, and they actually
use the mass of the asteroid
as part of the space station.
So it's a mining operation,
but it's also an environment,
a living environment.
And the larger the asteroid,
the more incredible
the environment can become.
When you get to asteroids as
large as Eros or even Ceres,
now you have even a modicum
of gravity on there.
>>NOORY: Why isn't that
spacecraft zooming off
the asteroid?
How can it stay?
>>AGNEW: Well, they're attached.
They bore in and
fix their pylons.
And as long as they don't make
a move away from the asteroid,
they're going to stay to it.
If you look on the surface of
there, there's a lot of loose--
looks like gravel and
boulders and things.
They're held there
by microgravity.
>>NOORY: How big is this
asteroid, in your opinion?
>>AGNEW: This one's probably
about 1 kilometer across.
But there are asteroids
1,000 kilometers across.
And there are thousands
and thousands of them
5 to 10 kilometers across.
>>NOORY: And what are we
looking at in the lower left?
What is all that?
Just equipment?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, it's
just equipment, mostly
mining equipment.
You see some gas accumulation
modules down here
in the bottom of the picture--
>>NOORY: The yellow balls?
>>AGNEW: --solar panels, vents.
>>NOORY: What kind of technology
would allow us to do this?
Can we do this now?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, we
can do this now.
We have all the equipment
to do this right now.
>>NOORY: Really?
And what would you--
how would you get all
this back to our planet?
>>AGNEW: Well, that's the
wonderful thing about it.
You're out here in
the asteroid belt.
You're on the outside
of Mars' orbit.
So you would generally
be packaging--
this is what's called a pusher.
So this is taking an
asteroid, and it's
pushing it to another location.
>>NOORY: This craft
is pushing it?
>>AGNEW: Right.
>>NOORY: It's attached to
it, and it's pushing it.
>>AGNEW: Right.
And you can see, the habitats
are the large, round structures
in the front.
That's where the crew stays.
And then this
actually physically
attaches itself to an asteroid.
And like a tugboat, it just
pushes it through space.
>>NOORY: Now, that looks
like a small asteroid.
Is it?
>>AGNEW: Yeah,
that's pretty small.
That's just maybe a few
hundred yards across.
But if it was solid
platinum, it would be worth
half a trillion dollars.
>>NOORY: Now, are you pushing
this close to planet Earth?
And what are the dangers
that it might hit?
>>AGNEW: Probably we would not
move an asteroid back to Earth.
There are points
near Earth which
we call the Lagrange points.
They are points
of a gravity well,
an equidistant point between the
moon, the Earth, and the sun.
And it is where--
well, normally we
call them Trojans
where asteroids will kind
of float through space
and they'll get sucked
into this gravity well
and they'll stay there.
We don't have a lot of
those in the gravity wells
around Earth-- these
Lagrange points.
So it would behoove Earth
to move an asteroid bigger
than that, maybe 10 kilometers
across or 20 kilometers across,
and set it in that
gravity well and then
use it as a weigh station.
But it would be much
more than that, just more
than a refueling station
to refuel spacecraft
for deeper travel.
It could also protect Earth from
things like near-Earth objects.
We do not see very much
of space from Earth.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>AGNEW: That's why these
asteroids sneak up on us.
>>NOORY: That's-- or
they zoom past us.
Then we see them.
>>AGNEW: Yeah.
When you see it's dated 2020,
that means we just saw it.
It's not dated 2017.
We didn't see it
three years ago.
If you had a space
station out there,
you could see these things years
before they approached Earth.
And you could actually
save the human race.
>>NOORY: You probably
could because it's just
a matter of time
that-- it's not when,
but if we're going to get hit.
>>AGNEW: Earth is a
very, very small target.
We don't get hit very often.
If we do, we have
an atmosphere and--
>>NOORY: We've been lucky.
>>AGNEW: --usually it skips off.
But, yeah, if you go back
to the Tunguska event,
we're not really sure
how large that was.
But, fortunately--
>>NOORY: 1908, right?
>>AGNEW: Correct.
It didn't hit the surface.
It exploded.
It got so hot internally--
>>NOORY: Had it hit the surface,
it would have been a disaster.
>>AGNEW: It would have been
an extinction-level event.
>>NOORY: A couple years ago,
there was one over Russia again
that blew up.
>>AGNEW: Yes, that
was in Chelyabinsk.
And it did strike, but
it sort of skipped along
the surface on the ice.
But the sonic booms from
it injured a lot of people.
>>NOORY: What are the odds
that that region would get
zapped twice over 100 years?
>>AGNEW: If Earth
is going to get hit,
that's the region
that's going to get hit.
>>NOORY: Again?
>>AGNEW: It's not going to
be an equatorial strike.
It's going to be a polar strike.
>>NOORY: Interesting
take on that.
Near-Earth objects--
how long does it
take to get to Mars from
here, a couple years?
>>AGNEW: Right now, it
takes about seven months.
>>NOORY: That's all?
>>AGNEW: We have an opening--
>>NOORY: With the right
window, I guess, right?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, we call
it the Hohmann maneuver.
We have two orbits.
Of course, it takes
twice as long for Mars
to go around as
it does the Earth.
So we have a window that's
about a couple months long,
every couple years,
where we can launch.
And you're moving
from one moving object
to another moving object.
So because of the thrusters
that we have today,
that window's pretty narrow.
And we have to hit the orbit
of Earth to the orbit of Mars.
It's called a Hohmann maneuver.
It's very tricky.
>>NOORY: Is that easy to do?
>>AGNEW: No, it's very tricky.
>>NOORY: All right.
And if we miss that
window, what happens?
>>AGNEW: You're lost
in space, I'm afraid.
>>NOORY: No!
>>AGNEW: Oh, yeah.
>>NOORY: Oh jeez.
>>AGNEW: Yeah.
>>NOORY: If we have astronauts
and we miss the window,
they're stuck out there.
>>AGNEW: Pretty much.
>>NOORY: Oh my gosh.
>>AGNEW: That's why we
need the fusion rockets.
The fusion rockets would reduce
the travel time from Earth
to Mars to 70 days.
Now we're talking a
couple months in space.
That a human can do
without going insane.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>AGNEW: You put somebody in an
aluminum can for seven months--
>>NOORY: They'll go nuts.
>>AGNEW: --you have
a real problem.
>>NOORY: Every day, every day.
Are they training astronauts
right now to do that?
>>AGNEW: Yes, they are.
>>NOORY: And are they
noticing psychological things?
>>AGNEW: They always do.
70% of Air Force
Academy graduates,
right now, will be in space--
70%.
>>NOORY: You have done a
lot of work in this area.
Are you involved
in these projects?
>>AGNEW: I've been an
enthusiast my whole life.
Of course, I grew
up in California,
and I spent time
in the Air Force.
So I am a manufacturer.
That's what I do.
I run manufacturing facilities.
So I'm working with several
of the private companies that
are building components
that go on these.
And I'm trying to help them
from a quality engineering
standpoint to help
them be more efficient
and connect them
with other companies
and help them survive.
>>NOORY: If we do
these things, Brooks,
when would it happen,
in your opinion?
>>AGNEW: When you
say "these things--"
it's happening right now.
>>NOORY: Landing on
asteroids, mining asteroids,
attempting to colonize
the moon or Mars.
>>AGNEW: We recently did--
>>NOORY: 50 years from now?
>>AGNEW: We recently did
some flybys of asteroids,
and we landed on an asteroid.
And that was just
a couple years ago.
But these are small probes.
They're driven by ion drives.
The ion drives light up
and stay lit all the time.
They have very little thrust,
but the thrust is very fast.
So they're able to get these
things out there and do
these surveys, and that's why
we know where the asteroids are
and what they contain.
The next effort is to put a
piece of equipment out there
and actually mine an asteroid
or move the asteroid.
>>NOORY: Didn't the
Japanese land on an asteroid
and launch off it?
>>AGNEW: Yes.
>>NOORY: Successfully,
wasn't it?
>>AGNEW: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's pretty
good technology.
>>AGNEW: It's a
great technology.
It's a great tech-- it was
all flown remote from here.
>>NOORY: In your opinion,
do we get back to the moon
or go to Mars next?
>>AGNEW: Oh, we go to the
moon, for sure, first.
Absolutely.
I say, we're two years away
from landing another robot
on the moon.
What the nature of that
robot is remains to be seen,
whether it's going to
take actual samples
or whether it's just going to
drive around and take pictures
like the Chinese one.
>>NOORY: Don't we have enough
pictures of the moon already?
>>AGNEW: That's what I say.
We have some very
high resolution shots
that we collected courtesy
of the Chinese probe that
went around.
They put a high-resolution
camera about 80 miles up,
which was pretty close--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>AGNEW: --and did a
great job of returning
a lot of information to us.
That's why we know so much
about the volcanic vents.
But if we put a probe
on the south pole
and we actually check out
the Shackleford crater
and it turns out
to be what we think
it is, if-- the only
test we've ever done
was the Elcon mission, which was
kind of an improvised mission.
It was a two-piece
spacecraft, and it
was built with a bunch
of spectrometers on it
to measure emissions.
And the front part of
it actually failed.
So they decided to launch
the front part of it,
detach it, and let
it fall to the moon.
The spectrometer part of
it chased it to the moon.
So what happened was,
when the front part
struck the moon, of
course, it made a crater,
and a big plume of dust
and water and everything
flew up in the air.
A few minutes later, the
spectrographic section
flew through that cloud--
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>AGNEW: --sent its
message to Earth
and then smashed
into the moon itself.
We got that
information, and that's
how we know what's
in that crater.
>>NOORY: How long would
we colonize the moon
with an individual
before we replace him?
>>AGNEW: It's a good question.
We probably would
replace them about
as often as we do space
station people, which
is less than a year.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>AGNEW: But with
some gravity, a lot
of the systems, the physiology,
will still work with humans.
The thing that tests
the imagination
is, what does the second
generation do on the moon?
A person born on the moon
could never return to Earth.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>AGNEW: Because the
gravity would crush them.
>>NOORY: Really?
Even if they were born in some
area that was atmospheric?
>>AGNEW: Yes, because
that they would only
have one sixth the
gravity to work
on their bones, their muscles,
the development of their body.
Their body would adapt.
The chromosomes in their body--
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>AGNEW: --would adapt
to that environment.
That person would be perfectly
able to withstand 60 pounds
or 70 pounds of body weight.
But if you brought
them back to Earth,
they'd weigh 360 pounds--
>>NOORY: Instantly?
Instantly?
>>AGNEW: --in a relative
way to their bones.
It would be like you--
>>NOORY: You would feel
the pressure of that.
>>AGNEW: Yea.
>>NOORY: I didn't know that.
So if an infant is born in
space, they're not coming back.
>>AGNEW: Correct.
>>NOORY: What a life
that would be, Brooks.
>>AGNEW: That would be a
different civilization.
But once that
frontier is created,
that's where that 1,000
years of peace comes from.
>>NOORY: Robert Zubrin--
do you know Robert--
heads up the Mars Society--
has been talking about going
back to Mars with people,
see what happens.
Once we go to Mars and we
start establishing bases,
are we going to
replace these people?
Like, you're going to
be there for a year,
then we take you out and
put somebody else in.
Or are they going
to stay permanently?
It's going to be their planet?
>>ROBERT ZUBRIN: Well, I
think, once again, what
you'll see first
are the explorers,
and then you'll
see the settlers.
And explorers go round trip,
and settlers go one way.
>>NOORY: Yeah, they do.
>>ZUBRIN: That's what we saw in
the early history of America.
And that's what we're
going to see on Mars.
And in terms of
gender composition,
I think the explorers, by
the nature of the thing,
tend to be mostly men.
Settlers will be 50/50, because
men can open a frontier,
but it takes women
to conquer it.
>>NOORY: And this will be all
geared toward terraforming Mars
eventually so they
don't have to wear gas--
oxygen masks and
things like that?
>>ZUBRIN: Well it
goes in stages.
The first, the explorers,
they want to learn about Mars,
want to learn where
the resources are.
>>NOORY: They want to see
things, look at fossils,
if there are any.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, there's that.
>>NOORY: Everything.
>>ZUBRIN: There's the
scientific exploration,
but there's also
the prospecting--
find out where
the resources are,
find out where we can
drill and bring up
geothermally-heated
water to give us
hot water and power and
all kinds of things,
find out where other resources
are, stuff like that,
and maybe do some heavy work,
establish the first greenhouses
to get them going so
that they'll be up
and running when the
colonists show up.
You've got your farms
already running.
Then you get the colonists.
And they go there.
And yes, they're going
to want to greatly expand
the greenhouse
agricultural base.
They're farmers.
They're miners.
They're builders.
And then after the farmers,
miners, and builders
come the teachers and the
community orchestra conductors
and the publishers and
those kinds of people,
and you create a society.
And then, once this
is well established
and it is developing apace,
then you begin the question of,
how do we terraform Mars?
So first, we got to
do the reconnaissance.
Then we got to dig in.
Then we got to take the beach.
And then we take the continent.
>>NOORY: Is Robert
realistic, Brooks?
>>AGNEW: Well, yes.
There are some pieces
that go in order.
When you first go to Mars,
the first thing to do
is to send supplies.
>>NOORY: And just
get them there.
>>AGNEW: And that will happen--
right.
You'll send food and buildings
and all kinds of habitats
and everything to the moon.
Try to land them as close
as possible to one another.
And then you'll
send up people that
will assemble all that
stuff, put it together, make
it function, kind of like
the movie "The Martian."
And when you grow from
that, when you actually
have a colony spot
that will support life,
you have a stable
life support system
with plenty of food
and plenty of shelter,
then you can send
up the next crew.
I think, that phase,
we're probably
looking at 20 to 25 years to get
that done, to get to the point
where we can put colonists on
Mars in these small habitats.
>>NOORY: And as you've
said before, too,
water is going to
be a huge issue.
>>AGNEW: Water's a huge thing.
>>NOORY: How do you get
enough water up there?
>>AGNEW: Well, you recycle some.
One of the things that we
don't know about Mars--
and we're sending another rover
up there now to check this
out--
is we don't know what's
under the surface of Mars.
>>NOORY: Right.
We think solid water, right?
>>AGNEW: Well, we've
taken what we call
ground probing radar shots.
But the way this
technology works,
they have a signal
that's launched
from space to the Earth.
And then you have receiving
antennas on the Mars itself,
picking up those signals.
It's only good for maybe
2,000 or 3,000 feet
below the surface.
Can't really get
that deep when you're
launching a signal from space.
We need to put the source of
the signal right on the surface
and then beam it into the
planet and then receive it
from another location.
That's two antennas.
That gives you
some triangulation.
Now you can tell depth and
the quantity and quality
of the substrata we
haven't done that yet.
And as far as I know,
there's nothing in the works
to go on a launch engine
for the next five years.
So we have to do
that first before we
can talk about recovering
water from Mars.
>>NOORY: Before we colonize
any of these places,
is the plan to stay there
for a long, long time?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, that's the
plan, to create a frontier.
One of the most recent
discoveries we made about Mars,
we made a mistake.
We took some spectrographic
readings of the atmosphere,
and we thought
that the atmosphere
didn't hold much water at all.
But now we see that the
atmosphere is actually
about 300% supersaturated
with chemical water.
So we need a way to recover
that water from the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: And you think
we need to do this?
We need to go and colonize?
>>AGNEW: Yeah, I think so.
It's-- why stay here
and just stay stable?
Earth has a record of many
zeniths of human races
before us.
They flourished.
They've prospered.
And they've destroyed
themselves--
>>NOORY: And they perished.
>>AGNEW: --and died out.
And then we start over again.
This is our time.
We now finally have the
technology, the people,
the health, the population
that we can do this.
And I think that this is--
we're destined to do it.
>>NOORY: 500 years from now,
how do you envision Mars?
>>AGNEW: You know,
it's interesting.
This kind of effort
is always preempted
by science fiction writers.
And I have to
reflect to the series
"The Expanse" that's on Amazon.
That's about 500
years in the future.
And the way they have
portrayed what society
will be like-- it's a
little on the darker
side with the geopolitical
forces and everything.
But the technology is spot on.
Exactly what they have done
in that science fiction series
is what we would do.
>>NOORY: It's going to happen.
>>AGNEW: Well, first
we develop the moon
and get the fuel source.
Then we go to Mars and
start terraforming, at least
in a regional way.
And then we start
asteroid mining.
That is the future.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
Brooks, thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>AGNEW: Thank you so much.
>>NOORY: It's an
amazing possibility.
How exciting to think
about the possibilities
that we one day might
explore the moon and Mars
and actually colonize those
areas until the end of time.
I'm Georgia Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]